Improve HTML and CSS perf docs (#27558)
mdn/content: files/en-us/learn/performance/css/index.md

{{LearnSidebar}}{{PreviousMenuNext("Learn/Performance/html", "Learn/Performance/business_case_for_performance", "Learn/Performance")}}

> When developing a website, it is important to consider how the browser is handling your CSS, and optimize it to mitigate any performance issues that it is causing. For example, you should optimize for render blocking, and minimize the number of required reflows. This article walks you through key CSS performance techniques and features.

Author: updated

<table>
  <tbody>
    <tr>
      <th scope="row">Prerequisites:</th>
      <td>
        Basic computer literacy,
        <a
          href="/en-US/docs/Learn/Getting_started_with_the_web/Installing_basic_software"
          >basic software installed</a
        >, and basic knowledge of
        <a href="/en-US/docs/Learn/Getting_started_with_the_web"
          >client-side web technologies</a
        >.
      </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th scope="row">Objective:</th>
      <td>
        To learn about the impact of CSS on web
        performance optimization.

>       </td>

Author: updated, on both articles.

    </tr>
  </tbody>
</table>

> 

Author: No, I think it's OK without.

## CSS rendering optimization

> 

Author: No; the current first section fits first in terms of info progression. I think I'll link to a definition on first mention.

> 

Reviewer: Thanks

- **Split CSS into separate modules**: Keeping CSS modular means that CSS not required at page load can be loaded later on, reducing initial CSS render-blocking and loading times. The simplest way to do this is to split your CSS up into separate files, and loading only what is needed:

  ```html
  <!-- Loading and parsing styles.css is render-blocking -->
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="styles.css" />

  <!-- Loading and parsing print.css is not render-blocking -->
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="print.css" media="print" />

  <!-- Loading and parsing mobile.css is not render-blocking on large screens -->
  <link
    rel="stylesheet"
    href="mobile.css"
    media="screen and (max-width: 480px)" />
  ```

>   The above example provides default styles, styles that will only be loaded when the document is being printed, and styles that will be loaded only by devices with narrow screens. By default, the browser assumes that each specified style sheet is render-blocking. You can tell the browser when the style sheet should be applied by adding a `media` attribute containing a [media query](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/Media_Queries/Using_media_queries). When the browser sees a style sheet that it only needs to apply in a specific scenario, it still downloads the stylesheet, but doesn't render-block. By separating the CSS into multiple files, the main render-blocking file, in this case `styles.css`, is much smaller, reducing the time that rendering is blocked.

Author: I've handled this, but in a different way

## CSS rendering optimization

Showing users an unstyled page and then repainting it once the CSS styles have been parsed would be a bad user experience. For this reason, CSS is render blocking, unless the browser knows the CSS is not currently needed. The browser can paint the page once it has downloaded the CSS and built the [CSS object model (CSSOM)](/en-US/docs/Glossary/CSSOM).

Browsers follow a specific rendering path: paint only occurs after layout, which occurs after the render tree is created, which in turn requires both the DOM and the CSSOM trees. To optimize the CSSOM construction and improve page performance, you can do the following:

> - **Remove unnecessary styles**: This may sound obvious, but it is surprising how many developers forget to clean up rules and declarations that were added in their stylesheets during development and ended up not being used. All styles get parsed, whether they are being used during layout and painting or not, so it can speed up page rendering to get rid of these. As [How Do You Remove Unused CSS From a Site?](https://css-tricks.com/how-do-you-remove-unused-css-from-a-site/) (csstricks.com, 2019) summarizes, this is a difficult problem to solve for a large codebase, and there isn't a magic bullet to reliably find and remove unused CSS. You need to do the hard work of keeping your CSS modular and being careful and deliberate about what is added and removed.

Author: Updated

- **Split CSS into separate modules**: Keeping CSS modular means that CSS not required at page load can be loaded later on, reducing initial CSS render-blocking and loading times. The simplest way to do this is to split your CSS up into separate files, and loading only what is needed:

> 

Author: This is because the code example `<div>`s have no top margin set on them. We could perhaps consider adding a rule along the lines of `li > .code-example { margin-top: 2rem }` to fix it, so it doesn't affect code blocks except when they are inside list items.

  ```html
  <!-- Loading and parsing styles.css is render-blocking -->
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="styles.css" />

  <!-- Loading and parsing print.css is not render-blocking -->
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="print.css" media="print" />

  <!-- Loading and parsing mobile.css is not render-blocking on large screens -->
  <link
    rel="stylesheet"
    href="mobile.css"
    media="screen and (max-width: 480px)" />
  ```

  The above example provides default styles, styles that will only be loaded when the document is being printed, and styles that will be loaded only by devices with narrow screens. By default, the browser assumes that each specified style sheet is render-blocking. You can tell the browser when the style sheet should be applied by adding a `media` attribute containing a [media query](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/Media_Queries/Using_media_queries). When the browser sees a style sheet that it only needs to apply in a specific scenario, it still downloads the stylesheet, but doesn't render-block. By separating the CSS into multiple files, the main render-blocking file, in this case `styles.css`, is much smaller, reducing the time that rendering is blocked.

> - **Minify and compress your CSS**: Loading times can be reduced by minifying your CSS (meaning removing all the whitespace in the file that is only there for human readability), and making sure that the server that your site is hosted on uses compression such as gzip on files before serving them. Minification is generally done as part of a build process (for example, most JavaScript frameworks will minify code when you build a project ready to be deployed to production).

Author: Updated

The simplest advice is to cut down on all unnecessary animations. You could also provide users with a control/site preference to turn off animations if they are on a low-powered device, perhaps using JavaScript to control whether animation is applied to the page in the first place. There is also a media query called [`prefers-reduced-motion`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/@media/prefers-reduced-motion) that can be used to selectively serve animation styles or not based on a user's OS-level preferences for animation.

If you must animate, first of all, you are making the right choice by directly using [CSS for animations](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/CSS_animations/Using_CSS_animations), rather than using old-school JavaScript techniques to dynamically change CSS styles to create an animation. If you want to use JavaScript, The [Web Animations API](/en-US/docs/Web/API/Web_Animations_API) provides a way to directly hook into CSS animations using JavaScript.

> 

Reviewer: Can we add an H3 here, something like "Considering properties to animate"? There's currently only one H3 under "Handling animations"

Author: Good call; I've gone with "Choosing which properties to animate"

> Next, animation performance relies heavily on what properties you are animating. Certain properties, when animated, trigger a reflow (and therefore also a repaint) and should be avoided. These include properties that:

Author: I've linked reflow and repaint to glossary entries

- Alter an element's dimensions, such as [`width`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/width), [`height`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/height), [`border`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/border), [`padding`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/padding).
- Reposition an element, such as [`margin`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/margin), [`top`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/top), [`bottom`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/bottom), [`left`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/left), and [`right`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/right).
- Change an element's layout, such as [`align-content`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/align-content), [`align-items`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/align-items), or [`flex`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/flex).
- Add visual effects that change the element geometry, such as [`box-shadow`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/box-shadow).

Modern browsers are smart enough to repaint only the changed area of the document, rather than the entire page. As a result, larger animations are more costly.

If at all possible, it is better to animate properties that do not cause reflow/repaint. This includes:

- [Transforms](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/CSS_transforms)
- [`opacity`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/opacity)
- [`filter`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/filter)

### Animating on the GPU

> To further improve performance, animation work can be moved off the main thread and onto the device's GPU (also referred to as compositing). Elements whose animation will be moved onto the GPU include:

Reviewer: Do developers need to do something to move the animations to the GPU? There's both "can be" and "will be"

Author: I've rewritten the paragraph to provide an explanation:

> To further improve performance you should consider moving animation work off the main thread and onto the device's GPU (also referred to as compositing). This is done by choosing specific types of animations that the browser will automatically send to the GPU to handle; these include:

> - Those animated with 3D transforms: [`transform: translateZ()`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/transform), [`rotate3d()`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/transform-function/rotate3d), etc.
> - Those with certain other properties animated such as [`position: fixed`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/position).
> - Those with [`will-change`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/will-change) applied (see below).
> - Certain elements that are rendered in their own layer, including [`<video>`](/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Element/video), [`<canvas>`](/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Element/canvas) and [`<iframe>`](/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Element/iframe).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Those animated with 3D transforms such as [`transform: translateZ()`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/transform) and [`rotate3d()`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/transform-function/rotate3d).
- Those with certain other properties animated such as [`position: fixed`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/position).
- Those with [`will-change`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/will-change) applied (see the section below).
- Certain elements that are rendered in their own layer, including [`<video>`](/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Element/video), [`<canvas>`](/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Element/canvas), and [`<iframe>`](/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Element/iframe).
```

> Animation on the GPU can result in improved performance, especially on mobile. However, as with many things in life, it is not always that simple. Read [CSS GPU Animation: Doing It Right](https://www.smashingmagazine.com/2016/12/gpu-animation-doing-it-right/) (smashingmagazine.com, 2016) for a very useful and detailed analysis.

Reviewer: we're getting philosophical :)

```suggestion
Animation on the GPU can result in improved performance, especially on mobile. However, moving animations to GPU is not always that simple. Read [CSS GPU Animation: Doing It Right](https://www.smashingmagazine.com/2016/12/gpu-animation-doing-it-right/) (smashingmagazine.com, 2016) for a very useful and detailed analysis.
```

## Optimizing element changes with `will-change`

> The CSS [`will-change`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/will-change) property hints to browsers how an element is expected to change. Browsers may set up optimizations before an element is actually changed. These kinds of optimizations can increase the responsiveness of a page by doing potentially expensive work before it is required.

Reviewer: - Changing the order of sentences here - I think this is the intended flow of thought, not sure though if it is correct. - I think another sentence is needed here at the end to say how `will-change` can help with this - '...so the browser will not perform pre-optimization'?

```suggestion
Browsers may set up optimizations before an element is actually changed. These kinds of optimizations can increase the responsiveness of a page by doing potentially expensive work before it is required. The CSS [`will-change`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/will-change) property hints to browsers how an element is expected to change. 
```

The simplest advice is to cut down on all unnecessary animations. You could also provide users with a control/site preference to turn off animations if they are using a low-powered device or a mobile device with limited battery power. You could also use JavaScript to control whether or not animation is applied to the page in the first place. There is also a media query called [`prefers-reduced-motion`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/@media/prefers-reduced-motion) that can be used to selectively serve animation styles or not based on a user's OS-level preferences for animation.

For essential DOM animations, you are advised to use [CSS animations](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/CSS_animations/Using_CSS_animations) where possible, rather than JavaScript animations (the [Web Animations API](/en-US/docs/Web/API/Web_Animations_API) provides a way to directly hook into CSS animations using JavaScript).

> ### Choosing which properties to animate

Author: I've gone for just "Choosing properties to animate"

- Alter an element's dimensions, such as [`width`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/width), [`height`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/height), [`border`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/border), and [`padding`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/padding).
- Reposition an element, such as [`margin`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/margin), [`top`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/top), [`bottom`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/bottom), [`left`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/left), and [`right`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/right).
- Change an element's layout, such as [`align-content`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/align-content), [`align-items`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/align-items), and [`flex`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/flex).
- Add visual effects that change the element geometry, such as [`box-shadow`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/box-shadow).

Modern browsers are smart enough to repaint only the changed area of the document, rather than the entire page. As a result, larger animations are more costly.

If at all possible, it is better to animate properties that do not cause reflow/repaint. This includes:

- [Transforms](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/CSS_transforms)
- [`opacity`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/opacity)
- [`filter`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/filter)

### Animating on the GPU

> To further improve performance you should consider moving animation work off the main thread and onto the device's GPU (also referred to as compositing). This is done by choosing specific types of animations that the browser will automatically send to the GPU to handle; these include:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To further improve performance, you should consider moving animation work off the main thread and onto the device's GPU (also referred to as compositing). This is done by choosing specific types of animations that the browser will automatically send to the GPU to handle; these include:
```

> - 3D transform animations (for example [`transform: translateZ()`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/transform) and [`rotate3d()`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/transform-function/rotate3d)).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- 3D transform animations such as [`transform: translateZ()`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/transform) and [`rotate3d()`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/transform-function/rotate3d)).
```
to keep the style of presenting examples similar across bullet points

Author: updated

By default, the browser assumes that each specified style sheet is render blocking. Tell the browser when the style sheet should be applied by adding a `media` attribute with the [media query](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/CSS_media_queries/Using_media_queries). When the browser sees a style sheet it knows that it only needs to apply it for a specific scenario, it still downloads the stylesheet, but doesn't render block. By separating out the CSS into multiple files, the main render-blocking file, in this case `styles.css`, is much smaller, reducing the time that rendering is blocked.

## Animating on the GPU

> Browsers are optimized to handle CSS animations, and handle animating properties that do not trigger a reflow (and therefore also a repaint) very well. To improve performance, the node being animated can be moved off the main thread and onto the GPU. Properties that will lead to compositing include 3D transforms ([`transform: translateZ()`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/transform), [`rotate3d()`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/transform-function/rotate3d), etc.), animating transform and [`opacity`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/opacity), [`position: fixed`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/position), [`will-change`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/will-change), and [`filter`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/filter). Some elements, including [`<video>`](/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Element/video), [`<canvas>`](/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Element/canvas) and [`<iframe>`](/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Element/iframe), are also on their own layer. When an element is promoted as a layer, also known as composited, animating transform properties is done in the GPU, resulting in improved performance, especially on mobile.

Reviewer: should this section be deleted since now this is covered under "Handling animations"?

Author: Ack, I meant to delete this, then forgot. Removed now!

## Improving font performance

This section contains some useful tips for improving web font performance.

> In general, think carefully about the fonts you use on your site. Some font files can be very large (multiple megabytes). While it can be tempting to use lots of fonts for visual excitment, this can slow down loading significantly, and cause your site to look like a mess. You probably only need about 2 or 3, and you could get away with less if you chose to use [web safe fonts](/en-US/docs/Learn/CSS/Styling_text/Fundamentals#web_safe_fonts).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In general, think carefully about the fonts you use on your site. Some font files can be very large (multiple megabytes). While it can be tempting to use lots of fonts for visual excitement, this can slow down loading significantly and cause your site to look like a mess. You probably only need about two or there fonts, and you could get away with less if you choose to use [web safe fonts](/en-US/docs/Learn/CSS/Styling_text/Fundamentals#web_safe_fonts).
```

Author: updated

### Font loading

Bear in mind that a font is only loaded when it is actually applied to an element using the [`font-family`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/font-family) property, not when it is first referenced using the [`@font-face`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/@font-face) at-rule:

```css
/* Font not loaded here */
@font-face {
  font-family: "Open Sans";
  src: url("OpenSans-Regular-webfont.woff2") format("woff2");
}

h1,
h2,
h3 {
  /* It is actually loaded here */
  font-family: "Open Sans";
}
```

> It can therefore be benefitical to use `rel="preload"` to load important fonts early, so they will be available more quickly when they are actually needed:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It can therefore be beneficial to use `rel="preload"` to load important fonts early, so they will be available more quickly when they are actually needed:
```

```html
<link
  rel="preload"
  href="OpenSans-Regular-webfont.woff2"
  as="font"
  type="font/woff2"
  crossorigin />
```

> This is more likely to be beneficial if your `font-family` declaration is hidden inside a large external stylesheet, and won't be reached until significantly later in the parsing process. It is a tradeoff however — fonts files are quite large, and if you preload too many of them, you may delay other resources.
> 
> You can also consider:
> 
> - Using [`rel="preconnect"`](/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Attributes/rel/preconnect) to make an early connection with the font provider. See [Preconnect to critical third-party origins](https://web.dev/font-best-practices/#preconnect-to-critical-third-party-origins) for details.
> - Using the [CSS Font Loading API](/en-US/docs/Web/API/CSS_Font_Loading_API) to customize your font loading behavior via JavaScript.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is more likely to be beneficial if your `font-family` declaration is hidden inside a large external stylesheet, and won't be reached until significantly later in the parsing process. It is a tradeoff however — font files are quite large, and if you preload too many of them, you may delay other resources.

You can also consider:

- Using [`rel="preconnect"`](/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Attributes/rel/preconnect) to make an early connection with the font provider. See [Preconnect to critical third-party origins](https://web.dev/font-best-practices/#preconnect-to-critical-third-party-origins) for details.
- Using the [CSS Font Loading API](/en-US/docs/Web/API/CSS_Font_Loading_API) to customize the font loading behavior via JavaScript.
```

> ### Load only the glyphs you need
> 
> When choosing a font for body copy, it is harder to be sure of what glyphs will be used in it, especially if you are dealing with user generated content and/or content across multiple languages.
> 
> However, if you know you are going to use a specific set of glyphs (for example in headings, or spercific punctuation characters only), you could limit the number of glyphs the browser has to download. This could be done in a brute-force way, by creating a font file than only contains that subset.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Loading only the glyphs you need

When choosing a font for body copy, it is harder to be sure of the glyphs that will be used in it, especially if you are dealing with user-generated content and/or content across multiple languages.

However, if you know you are going to use a specific set of glyphs (for example, glyphs for headings or specific punctuation characters only), you could limit the number of glyphs the browser has to download. This could be done in a brute-force way by creating a font file that only contains the required subset.
```

}
```

## Optimizing styling recalculation with CSS containment

> The [CSS containment](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/CSS_containment) module aims to provide performance improvements by allowing the browser to isolate parts of the page from one another and make optimizations when rendering those parts, independently from one another. As an example, the browser can choose to not render parts until they are visible in the viewport.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By using the properties defined in the [CSS containment](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/CSS_containment) module, you can enable the browser to isolate different parts of a page and optimize their rendering independently from one another. This allows for improved performance in rendering individual sections. As an example, you can specify to the browser to not render parts until they are visible in the viewport.
```

Author: updated

The {{cssxref("contain")}} property allows an author to specify exactly what containment types they want applied to individual containers on the page. This allows the browser to recalculate layout, style, paint, size, or any combination of them for a limited part of the DOM.

```css
article {
  contain: content;
}
```

The {{cssxref("content-visibility")}} property is a useful shortcut, which allows authors to apply a strong set of containments on a set of containers and specify that the browser should not lay out and render those containers until needed.

> A second property, {{cssxref("contain-intrinsic-size")}}, is also available, which allows you to provide a placeholder size for the containers while they are under the effects of containment. This means that the containers will take up space even if their contents have not yet been renderered, allowing containment to do its performance magic without the risk of scroll bar shift and jank as elements render and come into view.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A second property, {{cssxref("contain-intrinsic-size")}}, is also available, which allows you to provide a placeholder size for the containers while they are under the effects of containment. This means that the containers will take up space even if their contents have not yet been renderered, allowing containment to do its performance magic without the risk of scroll bar shift and jank as elements render and come into view. This makes the initial page load to be much faster.
```

Author: updated

```css
article {
  content-visibility: auto;
  contain-intrinsic-size: 1000px;
}
```

> This causes the intial page load to be much faster.

Reviewer: moving this up to previous para
```suggestion

```
